PLANET's alignment with the IKB

Jim Blythe, ISI, 
Cleo Condoravdi, Teknowledge and
Ben Rode, Cycorp

This document summarizes the current alignment of ISI's PLANET ontology
with Cyc and the IKB. The process is still ongoing and some decisions
have been left until later, but we view this as a useful roadmap. We
have identified some of the entities in PLANET with existing entities in
the IKB, and added entities to Cyc that correspond to many of the
others. Some of these were straightforward to model in Cyc while others
presented technical challenges whose solutions we describe below. There
remain some entities that are not yet mapped in Cyc, either because the
exact way they should be modelled still needs to be ironed out or
because, in the IKB, they may have a better fit in a different
ontology. Still, we hope to have a preliminary Cyc version of the
ontology in the next couple of weeks. We expect this to be useful for a
number of groups doing critiques of plans, since it complements the
currently posted ontologies.

Before going into the details of the alignment strategy we describe
three interesting features of the current scheme. First, several
entities that are modelled as concepts in Loom are more naturally
represented using microtheories in Cyc. Although this may make the
surface representation look different, it captures the same information
in each system in the most natural way, and automatic mappings are
possible between the two representations without loss of
information. Second, when entities in PLANET were added to Cyc the name
was often changed in order to conform with Cyc's naming conventions.
For example, PLANET's "problem-refinement" is called
"planSelectionRefinement".  Third, sometimes entities that appear to
need to be directly aligned because they are denoted with similar
symbols turn out to be very different in nature.  A lot of careful
analysis was done in this alignment in order to address this.  An
example of this is the relation "before".  In PLANET there is a relation
type that allows temporal relations between tasks to be expressed as
commitments, for example that taskA should finish before taskB in some
plan. Cyc already had temporal relations such as "before", but they
refer to an actual occurrence of plan actions and do not have the
(deontic) aspect of intention that PLANET is trying to capture.  A good
solution for Cyc is to provide a predicate that takes such a relation,
eg taskA finishes before taskB and expresses the deontic version. This
is the route we are taking.

Now on to the details.


First, these are the one-to-one mappings and subclasses that will be
made to existing Cyc concepts or relations. Where the concept is
equivalent it has been marked with "(equiv)", otherwise the PLANET
entity will be marked as a sub-entity of the Cyc one.

PLANET Loom concept or relation    Cyc class or relation

 plan                                 Plan (equiv)

 plan-task                            PurposefulAction
  These subconcepts will also be mapped by extension:
  primitive-plan-task, plan-step
 
 goal-specification                   Goal (equiv)
 (was state-based-goal-spec, but Cleo pointed out that although #$Goal
  is explicitly state-based, we can use propositions to capture
  objective-based-goal-specifications. This will be done in the Cyc
  version of PLANET.)
  These subconcepts will also be mapped by extension:
  state-based-goal-spec, objective-based-goal-spec

 sub-task (relation)                  subEvents
 There are more detailed relations in Cyc that may be more appropriate,
 but they are not as yet released in the IKB. Ben will look into getting
 more of these released, and then we will probably align sub-task to a
 more specific relation.

 preconditions                        preconditionFor-PropSit


 plan-task-template                   scriptType


Discussion on aligning the other entities in PLANET is still ongoing,
but we expect that for many of them, new entities will be added to the
Cyc version of this ontology that will allow the same information to be
represented. We are working to make sure that the translation between
the two versions of the ontology can be automated. Below are some of the
issues that we have discussed to this point and have some agreement on.

 temporal-restriction (relation):
This cannot be modelled as a ComplexTemporalRelation because
subrelations of this do not have deontic force, but a new predicate will
be added to Cyc to express the deontic equivalent of any
ComplexTemporalRelation appearing in its scope. For instance, to express
that task A should start after the end of task B, the predicate would
make use of the ComplexTemporalRelation StartsAfterEndingOf to say
something like (plan-requires StartsAfterEndingOf taskA taskB) (this is
not the actual predicate name, which Ben will choose.)  This will avoid
the problem of re-defining all the existing temporal predicates in
deontic form. The distinction in PLANET between constraints (imposed by
forces external to the planner, such as the commander) and commitments
(made during the planning process to specify a plan) will probably be
capture by the kind of microtheory in which the assertions are made.


planning-problem-context and planning-problem:

Some of the concepts used in PLANET to organise planning problems and
groups of plans will be modelled in Cyc as microtheories. Thus where in
Loom a planning-problem-context may have a number of planning-problems
defined from it, each with a number of plans, each in turn with
refinement plans, Cyc will have a hierarchy of microtheories to capture
the same structure. We don't foresee any problem making an automatic
translation between the Loom and Cyc versions. This approach will be
used to model the PLANET concepts planning-problem,
planning-problem-context and plan. Some of the relations between these
concepts may be modelled as relations between microtheories, including
problem-refinement and refinement-plan.  Others, such as sub-plan, may
be captured in a different way. The relation possible-task will be
modelled indirectly as an assertion about taskTypes made in a
planning-problem-context microtheory, and the relation initial-state
will probably be replaced implicitly by assertions about the domain in
the appropriate microtheory.

  PLANET (Loom)                     PLANET (Cyc)

planning-problem                   planSelectionContext
planning-problem-context           planSelectionBackgroundContext
problem-refinement                 planSelectionRefinement



The following relations, which capture the process of making and
examining choices, will be added to Cyc:
candidate
feasible-candidate
unfeasible-candidate

and also the following:
untried-candidate 
selected-candidate
rejected-candidate


capability: this relation on a task-template will be modelled in Cyc,
but the name will probably need to be changed in the Cyc version.

Action consequences and effects: Cleo and Ben are working on a richer
representation for the effects of actions, which will probably be
aligned with the following relations in PLANET: effects, primary-effects
and accomplishes (named "intentInPlan" in the Cyc version).

The following relations group together a set of assertions about the
plan and its components that are either made externally (constraints) or
internally (commitments). These will be modelled in Cyc, although some
of the restrictions themselves will be implicitly made in
microtheories. Note that the exact form of the equivalent entities
depends on choices made for some of the higher-level entities.

Planet (Loom)                       Planet (Cyc)

 plan-restrictions                  planContextRestrictionPredicate
 constraints                        planContextConstraintPredicate
 commitments                        planContextCommitmentPredicate
 plan-commitments                   commitmentOfPlan
 plan-constraints                   
 task-of                            eventOfPlan
 task-commitments                   commitmentOfPlanAction
 task-constraints
 ordering-restriction               orderingRestrictionInPlanContext
 ordering-commitment
 ordering-constraint

The following concepts and relations do not describe resources in
detail, but capture the way the planning ontology should link to an
ontology of resources. At ISI, we use the resource ontology that is part
of the plan critiquing problem-solving method, while at Cyc there is
still some work to be done on a taxonomy of resources. In any event,
these entities or analogous ones will be modelled in Cyc (although
relations will probably be used rather than the concepts in Loom):

 resource-requirement
 required-resource
 resource
 planning-resource                   


The remaining entities complete the PLANET ontology. The matter of
whether to add corresponding entities in Cyc can be decided as we
progress.

Loom name                            Cyc name


 problem-goal                        planSelectionGoal
 plan-goal                           purposeOfPlan
 intermediate-goal 

 precondition-expression will be modelled as a CycFormula

 plan-task-description
 primitive-plan-task-description

 planning-level-specifier
 planning-level

 human-readable-description
 human-readable-task-description
 human-readable-description-of

 human-readable-goal-specification-description
 human-readable-goal-description

 evaluation-structure
 evaluation
 comparison-structure
 comparison


Finally, as a result of our discussions some changes will be made to
PLANET. The concepts feasible-plan, rejected-plan etc that were
subconcepts of plan will disappear, to be replaced by subrelations of
the candidate relations feasible-candidate, rejected-candidate etc.

Some concept similar to justified-plan will be added that captures the
idea of a plan satisfying a maximal subset of the given constraints, in
the event that relaxations are made when the full set of given
constraints is not satisfiable.
